
Chapter 2
Prominance Fungurayi		R251946T
Ashton Kahlari			R252989W














Chapter 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Introduction
 This chapter presented a literature review of the various works that were found necessary to the proposed real-time anti-money-laundering detection system for simulated banking transactions using artificial intelligence. It introduced the main concepts, reviewed on-going work on the international, regional and Zimbabwean sphere, identified gaps in the current approaches and outlined the proposed work. The review was conducted starting from a wide area of study and ending up in the context of Zimbabwe

2.1.1 Anti-Money-Laundering
 Money laundering is a way that transacted money is made to seem legit whilst it is not. It was often linked to depositions in the financial system, to layering and even to integration with legal assets.
AML transaction monitoring is the current review of financial transactions or patterns that indicated a need for additional review by compliance officers of a financial institution. It was a component of the extensive AML programme including customer due diligence, record keeping, internal controls and suspicious-transaction reporting. Financial Action Task Force (FATF) encouraged a risk-based approach i.e the institution should implement the controls in accordance with its risk profile [1]. An alert did not infer criminal activity, but rather was an alert indicating activity to be investigated.
Risk based monitoring took into account variables like amount, frequency, time, channel, speed of funds transfer as well as deviation from historical customer behaviour. These indicators can be used together to create a low, medium or high-risk score. This was applicable in the current project which was intended to score simulated transactions and provide the reasons for high-risk alerts to a compliance officer.
This section introduces machine learning, anomaly detection, and explainability.
Data was used to train a machine learning system that was able to identify patterns and apply them to classify new oncoming transactions. A supervised learning approach was employed and it was able to use labelled suspicious and non-suspicious examples. Unsupervised learning (including anomaly detection) enabled the detection of the observations that were substantially deviant from common behaviour, without requiring full labels. A hybrid approach using both rules and a supervised output and anomaly indicators.
Jensen and Iosifidis [2] pointed out that there were two aspects to AML modelling which are as follows:
-customer risk profiling and suspicious-behaviour detection.
A model which seemed accurate would nonetheless fail to capture most of the relevant cases as they were all apparently not suspicious. The measure of accuracy alone was not enough so a measure of false postives as well gave a better picture.
An anomaly detector might identify the pattern of a transaction that is unusually large, unusual frequency or unusually fast; however, the activity might not be illegal. New technologies may enhance the effectiveness of AML, but may present risks to quality, privacy, cyber security, bias and things like transparency [3]. From the past research it was then emphasized that humans should oversee the system and any alert provided must be easy to explain. Instead of letting the model conclude a transaction as red flagged, humans then take the responsibility of that.

2.2 Analysis of Study
2.2.1 International Context
Previously, AML systems were primarily rule based only and omitted the fact that humans are behavioural. This could be anything from a transaction that exceeds a limit, multiple payments near a limit, transactions that occur in unusually high frequencies e.t.c. Rules were useful if they were bound to institutional policy.It might be normal to have a certain threshold for one customer and another for another, and criminals could adjust their transactional behaviour to get around with the known rules. This means that rule only systems may generate many false positives and fail to detect changes in behaviour or multi-step layering patterns.
Machine-learning methods were used to try to find more complex relationships. Other models, such as random forests and gradient-boosting models, can fuse together the amount, time, transaction type and behavioural characteristics and estimate risk. The models are limited in the sense that when a laundering activity goes unnoticed then it means that the data will not be labelled and that then also means that the data will be incomplete. Also when the laundering activities change with time the systems might not be able to catch those activities since they will be trained on old activities data.
Graph based methods took into account the relationships between the accounts and the transfers. For instance, Weber et al. [4] have shown graph convolutional networks for detecting illicit-transactions in cryptocurrency data. They found that interactions between entities could help in the identification of networks and transfer chains. For graphing, however, there needed to be data on reliable relationships, and more expertise and computing power. These are not as appropriate as the sole method for a controlled prototype for undergraduate.
There was some reviewed literature which indicated that it was appropriate to adopt the hybrid approach. Patterns that have already been seen through and labeled as known red flags could be detected by rules; patterns that have been labeled by a machine-learning model; and patterns that are detected as anomalies could be highlighted. Merging these signals may lead to better prioritisation and more conclusive evidence for evaluation as compared to an individual technique.
You can create synthetic transactions and simulate them.
Researchers like myself have faced challenges in obtaining real banking data due to the sensitive, confidential and personally identifiable nature of the data hence the incompleteness of the data and difficult in obtaining the realistic data from banks may be a stumbling block.
Altman et al. [5] created a realistic synthetic financial transactions and AML scenarios agent-based generator. They claimed that synthetic data allowed for a controlled evaluation as it had ground-truth labels and repeatable datasets to use for evaluating models. Through simulation, researchers were able to develop scenarios like structuring, speeding up money flows and unusual transactions without revealing any customer information.
Synthetic data, however, was not able to capture all the attributes of a real financial institution. It might be an idealized customer behaviour, while actual criminal strategies developed. Consequently, the result from a simulation should not be taken as indicative of the performance in production. The present project was not the validation of a prototype system through simulation; rather, it was a method of testing the prototype system that was acceptable ethically and controlled, as opposed to the actual validation on live institutional data.

2.2.2 Synthetic transactions and simulation
Synthetic transactions and simulation are then explained. Researchers had to deal with difficult to access real banking data as it was very much confidential and sensative. Furthermore, confirmed labelling was incomplete due to some laundering activity not being detected. These problems hindered the reproducibility and fair test of Anti-Money Laundering models.
According to Altman et al. [5] he used agents to build a simulation model. They stated that synthetic data allowed them to conduct controlled evaluation, as they knew the ground truth labels and the models could be compared based on the repeatable simulated datasets. The International Bausiness Machine Cooperation came up with the IBMSim project where there successfully created a simulation of banking transactions with the realistic patterns [6]. Researchers could move money quickly and have abnormal transactions as well as writing scenarios without sharing customer information.

2.2.3 Real time monitoring, risk scoring and case handling.
Real-time monitoring evaluated a transaction as it was received or at the very least, shortly after it was received, instead of waiting for a lengthy batch process hence efficiency. The practical architecture needed input to transactions, feature extraction, scoring of rules and models, storage of alerts and updates to dashboard and an audit trail.
The risk scoring process consolidated multiple indicators into a risk score or risk category for example in classifying transactions into low, suspicious or super suspicious, to assist the analysts' decision process in prioritising work. It might be a combination of a rule score and an anomaly score. But an alert without reasons may prove to be tough to investigate. FATF's technology guidance helped to ensure technology is used in a transparent, secure and governed way [3]. A useful alert should include, the relevant transaction details, as well as triggered rules, risk factors and review history to get the user’s behaviour from the past.
Several technical studies were performed on the performance of classifiers but were not able to show what would happen after an alert was generated. Case management was significant as an authorised user had to look at evidence, make notes then be able to escalate a concern or clear a false positive. To achieve this business need the proposed project provided a role-based dashboard which enabled alert review(by the compliance officers and the admin) and outcomes to be captured. It did not take the place of a banking institution's compliance programme or automatically report to the FIU since the system may also raise false positives.

2.2.4 Regional African Context
The financial landscape in Africa was seeing a rise in digital payments, mobile money and international transfers as well. These channels provided greater access and convenience, but at the same time it added to the responsibility of financial institutions like banks to monitor the transactions. Imported monitoring systems may not be appropriate, depending on the activity, since activity in Zimbabwe may be different.
FATF acknowledged that AML would be enhanced if the financial institutions can manage data and their technical skills well [3]. Such an explainable and modular system using conventional development tools was suitable for the learning and controlled experimentation. It would not replace the ability to have a secure infrastructure, data sharing and regulatory coordination in a working financial institution.

2.2.5 Zimbabwean Context
The Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) of Zimbabwe published AML/CFT guidelines as minimum standards which are legally binding for relevant sectors in the country under the Money Laundering and Proceeds of Crime Act [7]. The National Money Laundering Risk Assessment also identified the soundness of transaction-monitoring systems and management commitment as being important in mitigating money laundering risks in banks [8]. The National Anti-Money Laundering Strategy (NAMLS) of Zimbabwe also very much urged financial institutions and other reporting entities to implement transaction-monitoring systems and modern technologies such as artificial intelligence appropriately [9].
These documents were for establishing the local relevance of technology-supported monitoring. None of the published local material, however, offered an openly accessible end-to-end prototype that integrates transaction simulation, real-time hybrid scoring, explainable alerts and role-based case handling, in a Zimbabwean banking-learning context. Commercial systems were proprietary and real bank information could not be made publicly available for student experimentation. The local gap was thus a good indicator of the entire process from simulated transaction to risk assessment to accountable compliance review.

2.3 Gaps Identified
Table 2.1 presents the gaps identified from the reviewed literature.

2.4 Proposed Work
The ideas presented were an AML detection prototype that would be implemented in real-time in simulated banking transactions using Artificial Intelligence. A simulation module created normal transactions and picked higher risk scenarios that involve structuring, abnormal transaction amounts, fast flow of money and repetitive transactions. While each transaction was handled, the system extracted the relevant features from the transaction and evaluated them based on a set of rules and machine-learning results and anomaly indicators. These factors were used to create a risk score that included overall sum of the risk score given to the transaction.
Any transaction which had a score equal to or greater than a defined score was reported as an alert and shown on a web-based compliance dashboard (for the compliance officer). The dashboard provided the transaction details, the risk level and the risk indicators contributing to the overall risk level that the transaction reached. Compliance Officers have access to an alert, can make notes and mark it as resolved or escalated. The system was designed to assist with a human reviewer, not to be used for automatic freezing of accounts or automatic reports to the FIU or to make determinations of guilt on its own.
The proposed work's contribution was the merging of the following: Simulation, Hybrid Risk Assessment, Explainable alerts and the basic handling of compliance-cases in the educational prototype developed for the context of Zimbabwe.

2.4.1 Feasibility Analysis
2.4.1.1 Technical Feasibility
Technically it was possible since the tools and hardware used were easily available at my table. Pandas, NumPy and scikit-learn were used to integrate machine learning with transaction generation and feature engineering, both of which were much important to the development of this project. Python's use of pandas, NumPy and scikit-learn was crucial for this project when it came to integrating machine learning with transaction generation and feature engineering. The web interface and live updates were provided by Flask and Flask-SocketIO. Local storage was provided by SQLite and used mySQL when I deployed on railway. Local simulation, model training and functional testing were performed on an Intel Core i5 Dell precision 5540 laptop with 16 GB RAM and a 512 GB SSD.
The primary technical challenges were false positives/false negatives and performance at a production scale volume. The deployment of production was not in the scope of the project.

2.4.1.2 Economic Feasibility
The prototype was cost-effective to use, using off-the-shelf hardware and mainly open source software. All of the following were used for free: Python, Flask, scikit-learn, pandas, NumPy, Bootstrap SQLite and mySQL. The main cost was that of the students' time, Internet access, and/or electricity and my optional demonstration hosting on railway. I chose the paid version since my system needed more resources for a clean performance. The benefit was that this was an easily accessible and re-usable learning artefact, that allowed safe experimentation without having to rely on confidential banking data from the banks. The cost to implement a secure commercial system would need to be done on a one-off basis for secure hosting, integration, governance, staff training and maintenance as well.

2.4.1.3 Social Feasibility
It was found to be socially feasible, as it did not replace the judgement of the compliance officers in the banks. Nobody’s job was taken but rather made easier. Simulated data was used to keep the privacy of their customers and. The use of outputs as alerts and the fact that there was human decision-making and restricted scenarios reduced risk of bias and over-reliance on AI automation.

2.4.1.4 Operational Feasibility
The following procedure was operationally viable for a prototype with the following made possible; create a transaction, evaluate for risk, then create an alert as necessary, check it on the dashboard, make decision and record the outcome. The web interface could be accessed by using a normal web browser, and roles would have restricted case actions to only those given permission and the secure login informations. The prototype wasn't reliant on integration with live banking systems, external watchlists or FIU reporting. A secure deployment, alert-management, audit controls, staff training and institutional approval would be needed in the case of live deployment of this system. Overall, it was feasible to complete within the planned 25-weeks.

2.5 Summary
AML monitoring strategies were reviewed in the chapter from the international approach, regional context and Zimbabwean perspective. It discovered that the rule-based monitoring continued to be useful but that it could be restricted by multi-step and changing behaviour. Machine learning and anomaly detection provided complimentary pattern-recognition capabilities hence can catch what rules cannot catch, but these had to be grounded in reliable data, and were ultimately explainable and dependent on human oversight. Where real banking data was not available, a suitable controlled method of testing an AML prototype was provided by synthetic data simulated for the system.
The review found a need for a prototype that combines simulated transactions, hybrid real-time scores, simulated alerts with explanations and case handling by roles for the Zimbabwean context. This was designed to fill this gap as an educational demonstration and not a substitute for current an institutional AML programme. The methodology, architecture, and tools used in the development, simulation and design of transactions are presented in Chapter 3.
